Documentation improvements (#145)
Stormbase/django-otp-webauthn: docs/how_to_guides/keeping_passkeys_in_sync.rst

.. _keeping_passkeys_in_sync:

Keeping user details in sync with Passkeys

> ==========================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep user details in sync with passkeys
=======================================
```

When your users make changes to their details, such as their email address or
username, these changes won't automatically be reflected in the Passkeys they
have saved in their browser. This can lead to confusion as their old email or
username may still appear during Passkey authentication.

To ensure a smooth user experience, it's important to keep the user details
associated with Passkeys up to date. Django OTP WebAuthn has a template tag that
can help with this by calling the right browser APIs to update the stored

> Passkeys for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When your users make changes to their details, such as their email address or
username, these changes won't automatically be reflected in the passkeys they
have saved in their browser. This can lead to confusion as their old email or
username may still appear during passkey authentication.

To ensure a smooth user experience, it's important to keep the user details
associated with passkeys up to date. Django OTP WebAuthn has a template tag that
can help with this by calling the right browser APIs to update the stored
passkeys.
```

.. _the_render_otp_webauthn_sync_signals_scripts_template_tag:

The ``render_otp_webauthn_sync_signals_scripts`` template tag
-------------------------------------------------------------

This is a lightweight template tag that you can add to your base template. It
looks for a key in the session that indicates that user details have changed,
and if so, it renders the necessary JavaScript to update the stored Passkeys in
the user's browser. If no syncing is needed, it outputs nothing so it won't

> unnecessarily bloat your pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a lightweight template tag that you can add to your base template. It
looks for a key in the session that indicates that user details have changed.
If so, then it renders the necessary JavaScript to update the stored passkeys in
the user's browser. If no syncing is needed, it outputs nothing so it won't
bloat your pages.
```

To use this template tag, you would add it near the bottom of your base
template, just before the closing ``</body>`` tag. This way it won't block the

> initial page load, but will still be executed when the page is fully loaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the    
``render_otp_webauthn_sync_signals_scripts`` template tag,
add it near the bottom of your base
template, just before the closing ``</body>`` tag. This way the template tag won't block the
initial page load, but will still be executed when the page is fully loaded.
```

.. code-block:: html

    <!-- base.html -->
    {% load otp_webauthn %}
    ...
    <html>
        ...
        <body>
            ...
            ...
            {% render_otp_webauthn_sync_signals_scripts %}
        </body>
    </html>

How it works
------------

When a user authenticates using a Passkey or registers a new Passkey, the
default authentication and registration views will automatically call
``django_otp_webauthn.utils.request_user_details_sync`` after successful
registration or authentication respectively. This function sets a flag in the
user's session indicating that their details need to be synchronized. This is

> the official way to request a user details sync from Django OTP WebAuthn.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user authenticates using a passkey or registers a new passkey, the
default authentication and registration views call
``django_otp_webauthn.utils.request_user_details_sync`` after successful
registration or authentication. This function sets a flag in the
user's session indicating that their details need to be synchronized. This is
the official way to request a user details sync from Django OTP WebAuthn.
```

Reviewer: If we don't have an unofficial way to request a user details sync from Django OTP WebAuthn, then we should consider removing the following:

"This is
the official way to request a user details sync from Django OTP WebAuthn."

On the next page load, when templates are being rendered, the template tag sees
this flag and outputs JavaScript code that uses the appropriate WebAuthn API to
update the stored Passkeys with the latest user details. After the
synchronization is complete, the flag is cleared from the session to prevent

> rendering unnecessary the JavaScript on subsequent page loads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the next page load, the ``render_otp_webauthn_sync_signals_scripts`` template tag
sees this flag while rendering the templates.
It then outputs JavaScript that uses the appropriate WebAuthn API to update the stored Passkeys with the latest user details.
After the
synchronization is complete, the flag is cleared from the session to prevent
rendering unnecessary the JavaScript on subsequent page loads.
```

Removing deleted Passkeys from the browser

> ------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove deleted passkeys from the browser
----------------------------------------
```

If a user removes a Passkey from your application – most likely through an
account settings page that you have created – this removal won't automatically
be reflected in the Passkeys stored in their browser. Meaning the Passkey will
still show up the next time the user tries to authenticate.

To deal with this appropriately, you should call the
``request_user_details_sync`` utility function after a Passkey is removed. This
will ensure that the next time the user loads a page, their browser will be
informed about the deleted Passkey and can remove it from storage. Sometimes
this is associated with a prompt to the user to confirm the removal, depending

> on the browser's implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a user removes a passkey from your application, the removal won't automatically
be reflected in the passkeys stored in their browser. This means that the passkey will show up the next time the user tries to authenticate.

To prevent this behavior, call the
``request_user_details_sync`` utility function after a passkey is removed. This ensures that the next time the user loads a page, their browser will be
informed about the deleted passkey and can remove it from storage. This may be accompanied by a prompt asking the user to confirm the removal.
```

In the event that the user does try to use a removed Passkey during
authentication, the browser will automatically be informed that the Passkey is
no longer valid through the `PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential
<https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredential/signalUnknownCredential_static>`_

> WebAuthn API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the user tries to use a removed passkey during
authentication, the browser will be informed that the passkey is
no longer valid through the `PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential
<https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredential/signalUnknownCredential_static>`_
WebAuthn API.
```

How to trigger user details sync
--------------------------------

To trigger the user details synchronization process, you need to call the
``request_user_details_sync`` utility function whenever a user's details are
updated. For example, if you have a view that allows users to update their email
address or username, you would add a call to this function after the update is
successful. This will ensure that the next time the user loads a page, their

> Passkeys will be updated with the new details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To trigger the user details synchronization process, call the
``request_user_details_sync`` utility function whenever the user's details are
updated. For example, if you have a view that allows users to update their email
address or username, then add a call to this function after the update is
successful. This ensures that the next time the user loads a page, their
passkeys will be updated with the new details.
```

.. code-block:: py

    # your_app/views.py
    from django_otp_webauthn.utils import request_user_details_sync

    def update_user_details(request):
        if request.method == "POST":
            # Assume we have a form that updates user details
            form = UserDetailsForm(request.POST, instance=request.user)
            if form.is_valid():
                form.save()
                # Request user details sync after updating details
                request_user_details_sync(request)
                # Redirect or render success response
                return redirect("profile")
        else:
            form = UserDetailsForm(instance=request.user)
        return render(request, "update_user_details.html", {"form": form})

By following these steps, you can ensure that your users' Passkeys remain

> up to date with their latest details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You won't see any visible messages or indicators when the synchronization occurs, as
it happens silently in the background. However, you can check your browser's
console for any errors or logs related to the synchronization process if needed.

How does this work from a technical perspective?

> ------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How it works from a technical perspective
-----------------------------------------
```

The ``render_otp_webauthn_sync_signals_scripts`` template tag is a convenience
wrapper that ends up calling the
``PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials`` and
``PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails`` WebAuthn browser APIs. It
automatically retrieves a list of currently registered credentials and the

> current user details in the format these APIs expect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``render_otp_webauthn_sync_signals_scripts`` template tag is a convenience
wrapper that ends up calling the
``PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials`` and
``PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails`` WebAuthn browser APIs. It
retrieves a list of currently registered credentials and the
current user details in the format the WebAuthn browser APIs expect.
```

> For more information about these APIs, refer to the following resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about the WebAuthn browser APIs APIs, see:
```

- `PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredential/signalCurrentUserDetails_static>`_
- `PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredential/signalAllAcceptedCredentials_static>`_

.. note::

    As of November 2025, these APIs are still relatively new and don't enjoy
    broad support from all browsers. Please see `Web authentication signal
    methods on caniuse.com <https://caniuse.com/wf-webauthn-signals>`_ for the

>     most up-to-date browser support information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As of November 2025, the WebAuthn browser APIs are still new and don't enjoy
    broad support from all browsers. Please see `Web authentication signal
    methods on caniuse.com <https://caniuse.com/wf-webauthn-signals>`_ for the
    most up-to-date browser support information.
```
